1882(P)/01    ELECTRONIC NAVIGATIONAL CHARTS - Availability of UKHO produced 
ENCs; Cautionary 
              guidance on the use and limitations of ENCs and associated ECDIS 
systems

1.    The UKHO has developed a reliable system for the production of Electronic 
Navigational Charts (ENC) and carried
      out a lengthy period of sea trials. ENCs are vector electronic charts that 
conform to International Hydrographic
      Organization specifications. They are compiled from a database of 
individual items (`objects') of digitised chart
      data which can be displayed as a seamless chart. When used in an 
electronic navigation system, the data can then
      be re-assembled to display either the entire chart image or a user-
selected combination of data.  ENCs are
      intelligent in that systems using them can be programmed to give warning 
of impending danger in relation to the
      vessel's position and movement.
2.    UKHO produced ENCs are now available for sale as part of the PRIMAR 
Official ENC Service which provides
      a consistent, uniform ENC service on behalf of a group of participating 
National Hydrographic Offices in Europe
      (currently Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, 
Portugal, Spain, Sweden and UK).
      PRIMAR is in the process of developing a world-wide network of 
distributors. For further information visit the
      PRIMAR web site at www.primar.org or e-mail info@primar.org.
3.    Updates for UKHO ENCs are issued weekly in line with UKHO policy for all 
its navigational charts, paper and
      electronic. Updates are issued for all Permanent Chart-Correcting and 
Preliminary Notices to Mariners. However,
      it may not always be possible to issue updates for Temporary Notices to 
Mariners, especially those that cover large
      geographical areas and are not chart specific. Mariners should consult the 
paper weekly Notices to Mariners booklet
      for details of these Notices to Mariners. 
4.    Attention is drawn to the statement in Chapter 1, sections 1.1 and 1.2 of 
The Mariners Handbook (NP100)
      concerning the use of navigational information provided by the UKHO. This 
includes the following caution which
      applies to all charts, paper and electronic:
        While the UKHO has made all reasonable efforts to ensure the data 
supplied is accurate, it should be
        appreciated that the data may not always be complete, up to date or 
positioned to modern surveying standards
        and therefore no warranty can be given as to its accuracy. The mariner 
must be the final judge of the reliance
        he places on the information given, bearing in mind his particular 
circumstances, the needs of safe and prudent
        navigation, local pilotage guidance and the judicious use of available 
navigational aids.
5.    Considerable progress has been made in the development of Electronic Chart 
Display and Information Systems
      (ECDIS), the navigational systems which make use of ENC data. Many are 
being developed and a number have
      now achieved type approval. Mariners should be aware of the significant 
changes in navigational practice required
      by the introduction of ECDIS and of the need to manage these changes in a 
careful and prudent manner. It should
      also be noted that the appearance and content of the data displayed in 
electronic charts may differ substantially
      from the same or similar data in the paper chart form. The definition of 
an ENC permits them to include information
      contained in nautical publications. However, currently-available ENCs do 
not contain such information
      and mariners using ENCs must continue to use related Admiralty nautical 
publications.
6.    Because of the developing nature of ECDIS and because there is as yet only 
limited ENC data availability, there
      has so far been little experience of the practical, operational use of 
ECDIS. Mariners must therefore be aware of
      the user training requirement. They should satisfy themselves that their 
ECDIS provides all the navigational
      functionality that they will need and that they are familiar with the 
operation of this functionality. For example,
      some early ECDIS systems may be unable to display the cautionary notes 
which appear on the paper chart and are
      included in the ENC. Hence, care is required while experience is gained in 
the practical use of ECDIS. Some
      national maritime administrations have issued advice relating to the 
introduction of ECDIS, and mariners should
      ensure that they are aware of, and conversant with, that advice.
7.    Former Notice 3051(P)/00 is cancelled.
UK Hydrographic Office        (HA.403/011/133/01).


